People (salaried professional aside) play games for fun. Further, people
generally enjoy different things in different ways.

I was having a conversation with a friend of mine about some ideal patch notes
for a sort of Wow 2.0 based off of World of Warcraft: The Burning Crusade. I
was spitballing about removing factions from everything but questing/lore,
allowing guilds to fight over and tax cities and settlements, making mobs drop
materials/crafting patterns instead of completed items and more controversially
change a lot of the instanced dungeons and raids to be open-world. The idea is
that TBC is so solved that we could introduce player-generated conflict by
allowing them to contest each other for important resources.

In my head, that sounds sweet and like the sort of game I could play for hours
every day for *years*, instead of the TBC we have where we can quickly get our
BiS and then raidlog / do arenas every week. To my friend, on the other hand,
having to engage in server politics to form alliances to secure boss spawns, or
be expected to be online to defend a city you control, or have to go protect
guildies while they try to kill a boss in Serpent Shrine Cavern sounds
miserable.

They don't find that stuff fun; it gets in the way of what they *do* think is
fun: speedrunning raids for loot and doing rank-1 level 3v3 and 2v2 arena.

This is where the intrinsic fun comes in! Try to analyze what about the games
you enjoy is the *acutal fun part*. If you enjoy playing Path of Exile, *what
part*?  Do you enjoy researching/coming up with new builds to play? Do you
enjoy slaying droves of monster-fodder? Do you enjoy racing each new league?

If you enjoy World of Warcraft raiding, *what part*? Do you enjoy killing
bosses, or do you enjoy the dopamine-lottery that is randomized loot? Would you
and your guild raid content you've already cleared if none of the bosses drop
loot?  If so, you probably find intrinsic fun in clearing content with your
friends.  If not, you're probably [laboring for a
reward](/posts/make-it-always-good).

I find intrinsic fun in feeling like I'm living and participating in a fantasy
world. I *also* find intrinsic fun in clearing difficult content with my
friends.  I find fun in learning to play
[difficult](http://beaushinkle.xyz/posts/what-is-difficulty) games, expecially
if I can directly compete other players (either in PvP or beating them on DPS
meters). I *don't* find fun in raising an ELO score, experiencing a pre-written
plot (I'd rather read a
[book](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malazan_Book_of_the_Fallen) for plot), or
getting loot. For me, those are all a means to an end, or worse, things I have
to slog through.

The more different types of intrinsic fun a game tries to support, the less
focused it feels.  Whenever a game is unfocused, it will have players that are
willing to *put up* with some of its systems in order to be able to interact
with others. A MMO player who loves PvP might be willing to slog through
leveling and PvE content so that they can have the BiS gear to compete in
capture-the-flag. A hardcore raider might be willing to slog through a bunch of
frustrating 2v2 matches if it [rewards them](/posts/make-it-always-good) with
the best PvE gear. MMOs try to cater to all kinds of playstyles, and try to
lump crafters, marketeers, PvP players, casual explorers, hardcore raiders, etc
all together in one game. Their differences in intrinsic fun can *clash*,
leading to friction and eventually toxicity.

Now, if a game attempts to emphasize hardcore raiding, it'll have PvP players
and marketeers complain that they have to go through *more* of a slog to be
able to do the thing they enjoy. You'll hear the phrase "can't please
everyone". Eventually the game devs lose sight of their target audience, or
worse, they start designing for retention metrics or profit maximization. The
game is no longer the game *they* want to play, it's created for some nebulous
user that was derived by averaging user feedback surveys.

In focused games like Rocket League, on the other hand, the community is almost
singularly behind one idea: winning car soccer in a fair, skillful match
against the other team. They're down for changes that make the matches more
fair and down for changes that remove bugs that make the game less skillful.

I would love to see the MMO genre try to actually figure out what their target
audience is and then build the best game *for those people*.
