Creating a MMO leveling experience where players have to slog through
boring or needlessly repetitive content in order to unlock the "fun" part
is bad design.

If your game has a gameplay loop where you're laboring for a reward, that's
going to create resentment quickly. A great example is when overwatch added
golden gun skins to the competitive mode as a reward, which Jeff Kaplan (the
lead game designer) has admitted to regretting. Prior to the gun skins, players
in the competitive mode were playing *for the sake of competition*, and people
who didn't want that environment were in quick-play. After they added the gun
skins, the competitive mode attracts players who are willing to have less fun
in competitive for the **reward** of the gun skin. They're laboring for a
reward.

The MMO analogue is something like doing your weekly trivial PvE lockouts in
instanced PvE games. After your 4th month doing the same raid without wiping,
do you actually want to be there? If the bosses didn't drop loot, how many
times would you go? Are you *laboring* through the PvE content for the
gear-reward, or do you actually have fun in the raid?

Why does the game make us labor for X hours through the "unfun" part in order
to earn the reward and "be allowed" to play the fun part? Why not let me play
the fun part right away? Why not make the whole game different sorts of fun
parts?

-----

I think the main thing that games can do is make the player ability on-ramp
faster: give better players access to their whole toolkit sooner. Don't
*prevent* those players from fighting against more difficult mobs (make the
fights more about player ability and less about character stats), and reward
those players with better xp/h. A janky example of this is [solo mage zf
leveling in classic wow](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgwHw7qT4ws).

The secondary thing is to get rid of the hard separation between the leveling
grind and gear grind. There's this weird trend in MMOs where you don't
participate in any of the power systems *except* leveling up as you level up.
You *can* make crafted gear, buy stuff on the auction house, enchant your gear,
grind BiS for you level, etc. But why would you ever interact with those
systems when the main questing process gives you a constant stream of
good-enough gear and all of the content is trivially easy? It becomes a waste
of time to visit the same dungeon multiple times for the BiS pants when you can
spend that time just questing and leveling up, which replaces your pants with
quest-pants soon enough.

To fix this, we want to make sure that the most efficient way to play the game
*is* to perform the end-game gear-grind fun-part, but at lower levels.
Embed gear-grinds in the leveling loop. A brutish solution is something like
what Albion has where monsters have "ranks", and so you take big penalties
against T5 monsters unless you have the T5 reaver trait.

For a leveling MMO, instead of going straight from 1 to max in a continuous
way, maybe we can sprinkle in hard gear-checks to progress into new zones or
fight the new "tier" of monsters. That way before you can start doing level 11
content, you need to collect out-of-the-way gear from the level 1-10 content in
the same way that once you hit level 60, you need to collect your pre-BiS
before you start doing raids and whatnot.
