As a game ages and the developers iterate on it, they tend to lose touch with
the players actually playing it. Changes will come out of left field, or new
big expansions will with secret, exciting systems will fall flat at release.
Players are left with tons of [sunk
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sunk_cost) in a game that's now less fun
than if the *developers did nothing*.  Players clamor to for the ability to be
able to [play](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dUSRkBwQdc8) older [versions of
the
game](https://runescape.wiki/w/Update:2007_-_Old_School_RuneScape..._You_Vote!).

MMOs are different than games like Uncharted or Undertale in a few key ways.
They're much less about creating a spectacle / playthrough experience than they
are about creating a game that has a high hour-to-hour quality of life. They're
games that need to be optimized for playing 10000 hours instead of 40. As
players, we want our games to be good *worlds* to live in.

As such, I propose that the after-launch game iteration process follows a
governance system similar to old-school runescape. Why do MMO developers create
patches in secret and then launch them without community approval? Is creating
exciting and mysterious content and systems more important than creating nearly
universally loved systems? Follow a *democratic process* that ensures that the
players are getting what they want, and you won't need unfriendly retention
mechanics to keep your players around.

Propose your system ideas, balance ideas, and bugfixes to the community. Get on
calls, and make videos. Educate the community. Have the community either elect
a council (representative democracy) to vote on proposals or have them vote
directly. Develop in the open and your community will love you for it.
