Say you're designing a game, and you want to have some sort of mechanical
representation of power. The simplest possible game has one stat: "power", and
that stat gets applied to everything related to probability. The higher "power"
you have, the higher the chance that you climb a wall, charm a guard, steal a
purse, strike an opponent, dodge a hit, etc.

The downside is that fictionally different characters will be mechanically
equivalent: a Power-10 wizard and a Power-10 fighter have the same mechanical
chance to do all of those things. This can work in same games (FATE Accelerated
is really close to this), but feel unsatisfying in others, where we want to
represent some characters having specialization. The fighter ought to be better
at climbing rocks and the wizard better at deciphering arcane glyphs; not just
fictionally[1] but also mechanically.

If we want differentiation, we start partitioning our stats: maybe some checks
are related to body and some are related to mind. Then, our fighter can have
Body-7 Mind-3 and our wizard has Body-3 Mind-7. Now, the fighter and the wizard
are mechanically different, but there's still a lot of nuance available.
Should everyone with the same Body score be equally good at climbing rocks as
they are at picking pockets?

Maybe you split up Body into Might, Finesse, and Hardiness, and maybe you split
up Mind into Memory, Calculation, and Emotion.

Now, you can mechanically represent characters that are good weight lifters
(high Might) but bad pick pockets (low Finesse), or characters that are gifted
mathematicians (high Calculation) but poor at geography (low Memory).

Most games go further, making more and more proficiency splits. Every time you
do this, you increase the unique number of mechanical representations. If you
only have finesse, you're equally good at picking pockets are you are balancing
on a tightrope. If you make a thievery skill, you're equally good at picking
pockets as you are at sleight of hand.

That's the upside. You gain more and more unique mechanical representations.
It also feels closer to reality.[2] 

A downside is that if there's an opportunity cost to allocating this
proficiency (limited points to spend in GURPS or Savage Worlds, point buy in
d20 systems, allocating rolled stats, limited skill points, limited upgrades
when you level up, etc) then the more you split proficiency, the less likely
that particular proficiency will come up, and thus the weaker it is.
Intuitively, being able to spend 4 points on Thievery will make your character
"better" than having to spend 4 points on Pick Pocket, 4 points on Sleight of
Hand, and 4 points on Lock Pick. You spend 12 points for the same previous
effect as 4, and so you "lose" 8 points that you could have spent elsewhere.

Another downside is that it's higher overhead at the table. Having to remember
that Sleight of Hand, Filch, Smuggling, Holdout, and Pickpocket are all splits
of Stealing is harder than if there was just a Stealing skill. Having a
Stealing skill is harder than calling for a Finesse or Emotion roll, which is
harder than calling for a Body or Mind roll, which is harder than calling for a
Power roll all the time.

Another downside is that when characters have points, they expect those points
to be meaningful. For example, if a character invests into Hiking, then they're
attempting to mechanically differentiate based on how quickly they can march
over long distances: in a game that has hiking implies that some characters
should be able to travel more quickly or for longer than others. You might get
down into the minutiae of calculating travel velocity and hours traveled per
day, in order to make the investment into/existence of Hiking worthwhile. Is
this fun? Or would it be better at the table to just say "ya'll can move X
hexes per day"? 

Martial characters in GURPS often have high skill in one weapon group[3]
(Two-Handed Axe/Mace, for example). Choosing to do this *decreases* the amount
of fun loot (they'll be more likely to be disappointed that they got a magic
*sword*, and not a useful magic *axe*) and improvisational play that happens.

---

[1]: We can make a really simple system work by changing the impact based on
the fiction. Maybe a success for a Power-10 wizard at leaping over a cliff is
that they barely grab the edge of the pit and need help getting up, while
failure for the Power-10 fighter is the same as success for the wizard. See
[Advantage and Impact - Dreaming
Dragonslayer](https://dreamingdragonslayer.com/2020/03/28/advantage-and-impact/)

[2]: Personally, I care little about modeling reality. Reality matters less
than internal consistency, and *way* less than making sure the game is fun at
the table. If someone is annoyed in a dungeon fantasy game that a character is
equally good at mimicing bird sounds as they are at animal sounds because that
isn't "realistic"... where does it end?

[3]: A character with DX-13 and 16 Two-Handed Axe mace attacking another
character with 9 dodge takes ~3.3 attacks to hit twice. If that character picks
up a broadsword and attacks the same opponent, it takes ~12.4 attacks to hit
twice, which is a 3.75x increase in number of attacks.

[4]: I just give players info, see [The ICI Doctrine -
  Bastionland](https://www.bastionland.com/2018/09/the-ici-doctrine-information-choice.html)

[5]: I think traps are better as puzzles: see [Stop Hiding Traps -
  QuestingBeast](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RY_IRqx5dtI)

